Create a favorite_food.txt file which lists the favorite foods of a group of friends:
```
echo "carrot sandy
wasabi luke
sandwich brian
salad ryan
spaghetti jessica" > favorite_food.txt
```
Now use the awk command to print the file to the screen:
awk '{print}' favorite_food.txt
You’ll see the file printed to the screen:

Output
carrot sandy
wasabi luke
sandwich brian
salad ryan
spaghetti jessica

Let’s try out awk’s search filtering capabilities by searching through the file for the text “sand”:
awk '/sand/' favorite_food.txt

Output
carrot sandy
sandwich brian

To display only the line that starts with the letters “sand”, use the regular expression ^sand:
awk '/^sand/' favorite_food.txt

This time, only one line is displayed:

Output
sandwich brian

Similarly, you can use the action section to specify which pieces of information you want to print. For instance, to print only the first column, use the following command:
awk '/^sand/ {print $1;}' favorite_food.txt

Output
sandwich


The internal variables that awk uses are:

FILENAME: References the current input file.
FNR: References the number of the current record relative to the current input file. For instance, if you have two input files, this would tell you the record number of each file instead of as a total.
FS: The current field separator used to denote each field in a record. By default, this is set to whitespace.
NF: The number of fields in the current record.
NR: The number of the current record.
OFS: The field separator for the outputted data. By default, this is set to whitespace.
ORS: The record separator for the outputted data. By default, this is a newline character.
RS: The record separator used to distinguish separate records in the input file. By default, this is a newline character.

The BEGIN and END keywords are specific sets of conditions, just like the search parameters. They match before and after the document has been processed.

This means that you can change some of the internal variables in the BEGIN section. For instance, the /etc/passwd file is delimited with colons (:) instead of whitespace.
To print out the first column of this file, execute the following command:
awk 'BEGIN { FS=":"; }
{ print $1; }' /etc/passwd

Output
root
daemon
bin
sys
sync
games
man
. . .

You can use the BEGIN and END blocks to print information about the fields you are printing. Use the following command to transform the data from the file into a table, nicely spaced with tabs using \t:
awk 'BEGIN { FS=":"; print "User\t\tUID\t\tGID\t\tHome\t\tShell\n--------------"; }
{print $1,"\t\t",$3,"\t\t",$4,"\t\t",$6,"\t\t",$7;}
END { print "---------\nFile Complete" }' /etc/passwd

You’ll see this output:

Output
User		UID		GID		Home		Shell
--------------
root 		 0 		 0 		 /root 		 /bin/bash
daemon 		 1 		 1 		 /usr/sbin 		 /bin/sh
bin 		 2 		 2 		 /bin 		 /bin/sh
sys 		 3 		 3 		 /dev 		 /bin/sh
sync 		 4 		 65534 		 /bin 		 /bin/sync
. . .
---------
File Complete


Create a new version of the favorite_food.txt file which adds an item number in front of each person’s food:
echo "1 carrot sandy
2 wasabi luke
3 sandwich brian
4 salad ryan
5 spaghetti jessica" > favorite_food.txt

If you want to find all foods from this file that begin with “sa”, you might begin by trying something like this:
awk '/sa/' favorite_food.txt


This shows all lines that contain “sa”:

Output
1 carrot sandy
2 wasabi luke
3 sandwich brian
4 salad ryan

You can tell awk to only match at the beginning of the second column by using this command:

awk '$2 ~ /^sa/' favorite_food.txt

Output
3 sandwich brian
4 salad ryan

You can just as easily search for things that do not match by including the “!” character before the tilde (~). This command will return all lines that do not have a food that starts with “sa”:
awk '$2 !~ /^sa/' favorite_food.txt

Output
1 carrot sandy
2 wasabi luke
5 spaghetti jessica

If you decide later on that you are only interested in lines that don’t start with “sa” and the item number is less than 5, you could use a compound expression like this:
awk '$2 !~ /^sa/ && $1 < 5' favorite_food.txt

You’ll see this output:

Output
1 carrot sandy
2 wasabi luke

You can use the awk command to parse the output of other programs rather than specifying a filename. For example, you can use awk to parse out the IPv4 address from the ip command.
To display the information for the interface called eth0, use this command:
ip a s eth0

You’ll see the following results:

Output
2571: eth0@if2572: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default
    link/ether 02:42:ac:11:00:0b brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 172.17.0.11/16 brd 172.17.255.255 scope global eth0
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever

ou can use awk to target the inet line and then print out just the IP address:
ip a s eth0 | awk -F '[\/ ]+' '/inet / {print $3}'
The output shows the IP address:

Output
172.17.0.11

The -F flag tells awk to delimit by forward slashes or spaces using the regular expression [\/ ]+. This splits the line inet 172.17.0.11/16 into separate fields. The IP address is in the third field because the spaces at the start of the line also count as a field, since you delimited by spaces as well as slashes. Note that awk treated consecutive spaces as a single space in this case.